README.md, before:

# gentoo-pinebookpro

A collection of scripts to prepare a Gentoo tarball for the pinebook pro

Disclaimer:

I do not recommend Gentoo for people new to Linux. This script, while unable to damage your running system, is a beta release.

## How to use

READ THE GENTOO HANDBOOK!!! https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64

`./prepare.sh -h` to display usage, this is safe to run in any environment and will not read or write anything.

Download a Stage 3 arm64 tarball - usually from http://distfiles.gentoo.org/experimental/arm64/
Put the files of this repository into the tarball - preferably into /var/tmp/gentoo-pinebookpro
Chroot into the tarball as explained in the Handbook - https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Base#Copy_DNS_info
Execute the script prepare.sh - it is recommended to not change the default options unless you really know what this will do, and what will break if you do. 

From there on, do the usual tarball installation following the Gentoo Handbook.
Use `sys-kernel/pinebookpro-manjaro-sources` as the kernel

## Changes to the Gentoo repository

I have changed or added some ebuilds via my overlay `pinebookpro-overlay` . It is installed by the prepare script via layman.
The Kernel ebuild `sys-kernel/pinebookpro-manjaro-soruces` has been added. `virtual/linux-sources` has been adapted accordingly. The Vanilla and Gentoo sources do not work right now and have been masked.
The wifi firmware is packaged as `sys-firmware/pinebookpro-firmware` , from `sys-kernel/linux-firmware` only rockchip/dptx.bin is needed, the configuration is done by the script (see `/etc/portage/savedconfig/sys-kernel/linux-firmware-yyyymmdd`)
An ebuild for miscellaneous fixes `sys-firmware/pinebookpro-misc` has been added. It is required for full functionality.
The xorg server `x11-base/xorg-server` has been changed to disable glamor when wayland is enabled, as this breaks xwayland applications. This comes at a significant performance cost, to disable this the useflag `USE=glamor` has been added. You can ignore this if you don't want to use wayland.
The 2D Xorg driver `x11-drivers/xf86-video-fbturbo` has been added. It is required for most DEs that use full OpenGL instead of gles

## Useful stuff for people new to Gentoo

Ebuilds (the scripts that configure, compile and install a package) are sometimes not released as stable or not released at all for all architectures. This is called keywording: for example, KEYWORDS="amd64 ~arm64" indicates the ebuild is marked stable for amd64, testing for arm64 and masked for all other architectures.
You can and will override this a lot by editing `/etc/portage/package.accept_keywords` . Adding `category/package keyword` to this file will emerge the latest version that uses the respective keyword. For example, firefox has all LTS releases marked stable and all others marked testing. `www-client/firefox ~arm64` would always select the latest release. Dependencies that require keyword changes can be automatically unmasked and the changes merged with `dispatch-conf`

## Known issues

General:

	Issue:	The keyboard / touchpad is unresponsive sometimes
	Fix:	Make sure you have updated the keyboard / touchpad firmware, see ...

	Issue:	The PBP charges a lot slower after a while, the charging LED starts blinking
	Fix	This is a weird safety feature of the battery controller. It usually goes away after charging to full or restarting

KDE Plasma:

	Issue:	system settings crashes when trying to open some submenus
	Fix:	Add LIBGL_ALWAYS_SOFTWARE=1 to your /etc/environment, restart the session, do your changes, comment that line out, restart the session

	Issue:	SDDM crashes / becomes unresponsive
	Fix:	This only seems to happen in the SDDM login menu when you don't login within ~1m. Restart SDDM and be quicker next time :P . Help in debugging this is welcome

Commit message:

final changes for beta 2.0 : added some boot explanation

README.md, after:

# gentoo-pinebookpro

A collection of scripts to prepare a Gentoo tarball for the pinebook pro

Disclaimer:

I do not recommend Gentoo for people new to Linux. This script, while unable to damage your running system, is a beta release.

## How to use

READ THE GENTOO HANDBOOK!!! https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64

`./prepare.sh -h` to display usage, this is safe to run in any environment and will not read or write anything.

Download a Stage 3 arm64 tarball - usually from http://distfiles.gentoo.org/experimental/arm64/
Put the files of this repository into the tarball - preferably into /var/tmp/gentoo-pinebookpro
Chroot into the tarball as explained in the Handbook - https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook:AMD64/Installation/Base#Copy_DNS_info
Execute the script prepare.sh - it is recommended to not change the default options unless you really know what this will do, and what will break if you do. 

This script doesn't ship with a bootloader or similar, please consult README.md in the boot directory

From there on, do the usual tarball installation following the Gentoo Handbook.
Use `sys-kernel/pinebookpro-manjaro-sources` as the kernel

## Changes to the Gentoo repository

I have changed or added some ebuilds via my overlay `pinebookpro-overlay` . It is installed by the prepare script via layman.
The Kernel ebuild `sys-kernel/pinebookpro-manjaro-soruces` has been added. `virtual/linux-sources` has been adapted accordingly. The Vanilla and Gentoo sources do not work right now and have been masked.
The wifi firmware is packaged as `sys-firmware/pinebookpro-firmware` , from `sys-kernel/linux-firmware` only rockchip/dptx.bin is needed, the configuration is done by the script (see `/etc/portage/savedconfig/sys-kernel/linux-firmware-yyyymmdd`)
An ebuild for miscellaneous fixes `sys-firmware/pinebookpro-misc` has been added. Please emerge this after having booted into Gentoo, it will most likely fail in a chroot. It is required for full functionality.
The xorg server `x11-base/xorg-server` has been changed to disable glamor when wayland is enabled, as this breaks xwayland applications. This comes at a significant performance cost, to disable this the useflag `USE=glamor` has been added. You can ignore this if you don't want to use wayland.
The 2D Xorg driver `x11-drivers/xf86-video-fbturbo` has been added. It is required for most DEs that use full OpenGL instead of gles

## Useful stuff for people new to Gentoo

Ebuilds (the scripts that configure, compile and install a package) are sometimes not released as stable or not released at all for all architectures. This is called keywording: for example, KEYWORDS="amd64 ~arm64" indicates the ebuild is marked stable for amd64, testing for arm64 and masked for all other architectures.
You can and will override this a lot by editing `/etc/portage/package.accept_keywords` . Adding `category/package keyword` to this file will emerge the latest version that uses the respective keyword. For example, firefox has all LTS releases marked stable and all others marked testing. `www-client/firefox ~arm64` would always select the latest release. Dependencies that require keyword changes can be automatically unmasked and the changes merged with `dispatch-conf`

## Known issues

General:

	Issue:	The keyboard / touchpad is unresponsive sometimes
	Fix:	Make sure you have updated the keyboard / touchpad firmware, see ...

	Issue:	The PBP charges a lot slower after a while, the charging LED starts blinking
	Fix	This is a weird safety feature of the battery controller. It usually goes away after charging to full or restarting

	Issue:	The Kernel takes ages to boot!
	Fix:	Make sure CONFIG_CRYPTO_RSA is a module. Additionally there's another issue where some uboot versions initialize the big cores at 12 MHz, which will slow down things quite a lot until the Kernel loads the cpu governor. This can be fixed by adding maxcpus=4 to your kernel line and then onlining the two big cores afterwards.

KDE Plasma:

	Issue:	system settings crashes when trying to open some submenus
	Fix:	Add LIBGL_ALWAYS_SOFTWARE=1 to your /etc/environment, restart the session, do your changes, comment that line out, restart the session

	Issue:	SDDM crashes / becomes unresponsive
	Fix:	This only seems to happen in the SDDM login menu when you don't login within ~1m. Restart SDDM and be quicker next time :P . Help in debugging this is welcome
